---
layout:     post
title:      "Working relationships"
subtitle:   "as a PhD student"
date:       2024-12-31
author:     "Ruby"
# header-img: "/img/in-post/post-bioinformatics-materials/bioinformatics.jpg"
disqus_username: brainfo
catalog: true
tags:
    - work
    - life
---

## My identity

I am a PhD student. In essense, this role embodies self development in gaining knowledge and contribution in producing knowledge. There are varied ways to achieving these, but if one had values that are impossible to change or talents that better being preserved, one should formalize the ways accordingly. One should also bear in mind his or her personalized weakness, and see to improve them.

With my self-identity, I would like to develop myself in

- Know about data and science
- Respect data and science
- Know about concepts and relations between concepts
- Learn about the means to questions
- Practice the acquired knowledge that are deemed as good practice
- Learn from as many peers and experts as possible

*The reality is that many peaple put ego before science as their instinct act. There are strategies to resolve this. For example, be patient and give a second thought. Or ackownledge and find a way that covers both ego and science.*

Another reality is that "relationships" are out-towards, i.e., at this interface it's about a student's contribution. So in the following section, I will touch about with which kind of working relationships that I can contribute properly.

## Strategic collaborating

### Main supervisor and PhD student

### Collaborators contributing to the specific projects

I don't want to separate the co-first out. The strategies should be the same

### Other supervisors, peers
