---
layout:     post
title:      "Single Cell Genomics Day"
subtitle:   " \"toda uma naturza humana, flexivelmente pré-ordenada em nossos cromossomos e indiossincrática de cada um de nós\""
date:       2024-04-07
author:     "Ruby"
header-img: "img/in-post/post-SCGD/satijia.jpeg"
catalog: true
tags:
    - bioinformatics 
    - workshop 
    - genomics
---

This is a recap from SCGD 2024, including:
- a very concise list of concepts that catch my eye
- > my comments in quotes.

## Rahul Satija
Single-cell genomics: Recent advances and future directions
1. in-silico "experiments"
2. sample size > cell numbers
   > think about what matters to you, detecting rare cell type or information from major cell types (perturbation onto major cell type )? Most of my cases would be the latter.

   > Prior investigation on "how" to lower cell number per sample, project specific (sample quality and property play a part) remains to be done.

## 	Samantha Morris
New genomic technologies to deconstruct and control cell identity
1. "Dead end" and "reprogramming permissive state"
2. computation infill the gap between sampling and experimental measurement to the "truth".
    > I always say that our field exists only because of the limitations of experimental technology.

## Sten Linnarsson
Cellular diversity of the developing and adult human nervous system
- dissection-dissection correlation
  > Very good insights one can get from an "atlas" study

- Gaussian mixture model clusters and Topics
- Representative sampling, based on factors contributing to phenotypes most
  - e.g. sex, if really want to dissect, need large sample sizes. If you have not enough samples, no point in sex-specific analysis
  
> prior knowledge on factors contributing to phenotypes to guide study design before initiating projects

## Sanja Vickovic
Spatial host-microbiome sequencing
> comprimise between resolution and throughput
> integrate/cross-compare the results from techs with different resolution-throughput

- DataInno: in-silico tissue generators
- SHM-seq: host-microbiome
> how to dissect mutual influences?

- communicating or just proximity: computationally more on live tissues.
- subcellular spatial information: to higher resolution

## Brian Cleary
Compressed Perturb-seq: highly efficient screens from regulatory circuits using random composite perturbations
- compressed screens
  - assumptions: affect low numbers of co-regulated modules
  - from prior knowledge of scarcity of (**nonzero effects**) from perturbation, compress samples to O(k log n), then sparce inference by methods such as **LASSO**
  - composite sample: cs_1 = \sum_{i=1}^s w_{2,i} x_i (weighted sum of outcome of a subset of conventional samples)
    - Non-linearity, complexity. compressed- theoretially help with this. But in their 600 genes study, still too many as C_600^2 to test any significant pair
  - Methods: 
    1. cell pooling (multiple cells per droplet), resulting in droplet level observations in matrices
    2. Guide pooling (multiple gRNAs per cell), resulting in (target) gene level ... 
    3. Decompress: sparse factorization (sparce PCA) on expression count matrix (droplets by genes), sparce recovery (LASSO) on perturbation design matrix (droplets by sgRNAs)
  - Evaluation: 
    - 4-20x reduced costs
    - **Guide pooling** more effective in degree of overloading
  - biological analysis: cis-, trans-eQTL
